LA-UR-20-24692 (Accepted Manuscript)

Performance simulation of the soft gamma-ray concentrator
Shirazi, Farzane
Bloser, Peter Forbes
Legere, Jason S.
McConnell, Mark L.

Provided by the author(s) and the Los Alamos National Laboratory (2020-11-13).
To be published in: Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems
DOI to publisher's version: 10.1117/1.JATIS.6.2.024001
Permalink to record: http://permalink.lanl.gov/object/view?what=info:lanl-repo/lareport/LA-UR-20-24692

Disclaimer:
Los Alamos National Laboratory, an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer, is operated by Triad National Security, LLC for the National
Nuclear Security Administration of U.S. Department of Energy under contract 89233218CNA000001. By approving this article, the publisher
recognizes that the U.S. Government retains nonexclusive, royalty-free license to publish or reproduce the published form of this contribution, or
to allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes. Los Alamos National Laboratory requests that the publisher identify this article as work
performed under the auspices of the U.S. Department of Energy. Los Alamos National Laboratory strongly supports academic freedom and a
researcher's right to publish; as an institution, however, the Laboratory does not endorse the viewpoint of a publication or guarantee its technical
correctness.

Performance simulation of the soft gamma-ray concentrator
Farzane Shirazia,* , Peter F. Bloserb , Jason S. Legerec , Mark L. McConnellc,d
a

Clemson University, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Clemson, South Carolina, United States, 29634

b

Los Alamos National Laboratory, Intelligence and Space Research Division, Los Alamos, New Mexico, United

States, 87545
c

University of New Hampshire, Space Science Center, Durham, New Hampshire, United States, 03824

d

Southwest Research Institute, Department of Earth, Oceans, and Space, Durham, New Hampshire, United States,

03824

Abstract. The soft gamma-ray concentrator is a telescope mission concept utilizing a suitable arrangement of bent
multilayer structures of alternating low and high-density materials. This lens is able to channel gamma-ray photons
via total external reflection and concentrate the incident radiation to a point. The channeling technique offers the
potential for concentrating gamma rays with focal lengths less than 10 m and energies greater than 100 keV, beyond
the reach of current grazing-incidence hard X-ray mirrors. For performance estimation of such an instrument, we have
developed a flexible set of computer modeling tools to compute the optical properties of multilayer structures, predict
the channeling efficiency for a given multilayer configuration, and aid in the optimization of potential gamma-ray
concentrator-based telescope designs. This modeling includes the multilayer optical properties calculated by the IMD
software, the ray tracing using an IDL code, and the focal plane detector simulation by MEGAlib. We illustrate the
potential of this approach by presenting simulated astronomical observations from a balloon-borne platform. The final
result, including simulated effective area, instrument sensitivity, and polarization performance, shows the gamma-ray
concentrator will provide greatly increased sensitivity for next-generation soft gamma-ray missions with modest cost
and complexity.

Keywords: gamma-ray astronomy, soft gamma-rays, focusing optics, multilayer thin-film, focal plane detector, MEGAlib.

* Address all correspondence to fshiraz@clemson.edu.

1

1 Introduction
Non-thermal emission processes are common features of typical gamma-ray sources, which have a
variety of origins and may either emit mono-energetic photons or a broadband continuum gammaray spectrum. For low- and medium-energy gamma-ray astronomy (∼100 keV-10 MeV), exploration has only started1 and important steps need to be taken to bring the non-thermal phenomenology into the light and deepen our understanding of gamma-ray sources. Recent studies of bright
compact gamma-ray sources such as Crab Nebula2 and Cygnus X-13 indicate that multiple spectral components are present above 100 keV and understanding the physics and geometry of these
sources, requires improvement in astronomical mission sensitivity. On the other hand, in recent
years, detection of soft gamma-ray polarization4, 5 confirms that polarimetry would benefit from
high sensitivity due to the fact that the detected events must be binned according to energy and azimuthal scatter angle. Also, Hotokezaka, k. et al.6 have shown for observing gamma-ray emissions
resulting from radioactive decays outside the photosphere in a Neutron Star Mergers (NSM) ejecta,
new detectors with a sensitivity higher than current ones by at least a factor of ten are required.
Compared to the energy ranges adjacent to the MeV regime, the available instruments used in
the 80 keV to 1 MeV range are less sensitive. In coded aperture imaging systems, such as INTEGRAL,7 Swift8 and AstroSat,9 masks of dimensions greater than or equal to the detector dimensions are employed to optimize the sensitive area of the detector. In collimated detectors like Soft
Gamma-ray Detector (SGD) on Astro-H,10 the sensitivity depends on the root of the detector area
and, considering the limited size of practical instruments, it is very difficult to reach higher sensitivity than has already been achieved. But compared to the coded mask and collimator telescopes,
focusing optics used in hard X-ray missions such as NuSTAR11 allow a drastic improvement in

2

both sensitivity and angular resolution, with decoupling of collecting area and detector volume.
While Laue diffraction optics12 and advanced multilayer mirrors13 have promised to extend this
ability above 100 keV, they are limited due to required large focal lengths in the range of 20-100
m.
A new approach for gamma-ray optics over much shorter focal lengths based on channeling
in layered structures consisting of alternating layers of a high-density reflecting material and a
low-density spacer material was introduced by Los Alamos National Laboratory.14, 15 Low-density
layers keep high-density metal layers separated and parallel and a suitable arrangement of bent
structures can concentrate gamma rays to a small, shielded detector. This approach was further
refined into a concept for an astronomical telescope by the University of New Hampshire.16 We
assumed a theoretical example of a 20 cm diameter lens that could be assembled from many small
(∼ cm scale) multilayer structures arranged in concentric circles, each curved and aligned according to its distance from the centerline, suitable for either a balloon or spaceflight payload as shown
in Figure 1. The mechanism of soft gamma-ray channeling is based on total external reflection
between layers with sharply differing indices of refraction.17 Since the photons can reflect multiple times within the structure, much larger bending angles can be achieved than mirrors or Laue
diffraction optics, resulting in much shorter focal lengths. The channeling process is also effective
over a broad energy band, as long as the angle of incidence is less than the critical angle and the
photons are not excessively absorbed.
The successful development of this approach will enable future telescopes for higher energies
with same mission parameters already proven by NuSTAR. This technology would give a significant increase to the sensitivity of next-generation instruments in soft gamma-ray astronomy, and
develop gamma-ray concentrating instruments for balloon-borne pathfinder missions over short
3

focal lengths, as was done for hard X-ray balloon experiments.18, 19 Experimental results regarding
this concentrator effort have been described previously in the literature and include a description
of the deposition conditions of multilayer structures, fabrication issues, and concentrator characterization.20, 21 Many single and multilayer samples were grown to determine optimum coating
conditions in order to minimize roughness/stress and keep deposition rate high. We concluded that
the magnetron sputtered W/Si multilayer is one of the best-suited materials for the soft gammaray concentrator, due to their high theoretical reflectivity, relatively sharp interfaces, low residual
stress, and long-term structural stability. Table 1 contains the coated W/Si multilayer properties.
In this paper, we present the modeling tools development and simulation results of astronomical
observations from a balloon platform.

2 Optical Properties of Periodic Multilayer
Reflections in multilayer structures occur at each interface due to the discontinuity in the refractive index of constituting materials. The first step to consider the channeling technique was the
study of gamma-ray’s behavior in contact with a reflector surface and for this purpose, we used
IMD software.22 We were looking for the reflectivity of soft gamma-ray beams traveling inside
of the lower-density spacer layer and because IMD is not able to simulate the bent layers, during
our modeling, we assumed a low-density material as ambient for incident photons. We also calculated optical constants using data from the NIST database23 which covers energies up to 433
keV. We chose coating materials and their combinations to have high optical contrast and minimal
absorption. They also had to be formed smooth with good uniformity during deposition.
In Figure 2, we have plotted the simulated reflectance of four different material combinations
as a function of grazing incidence angle for a 122 keV photon. The thickness of 30 and 150 nm was
4

assumed for high and low-density layers. We specified the number of bilayers to be 280 to obtain
50 µm total thickness. During the optimizations, an interfacial roughness of 0.3 nm for substrate
surface, 1 nm for other interfaces (this is the value we measured for a deposited multilayer in our
initial experimental works)16 and zero boundary position errors were assumed. The boundaries
were assumed to be sharp since experimentally achievable tolerances do not have major effects.
The result shows that all these combinations have more than 95% reflectivity for grazing incident
angle less than 0.025 degree. However, Ir/Si has a larger critical angle for a minimum required
reflectivity of 95%, also W/Si provide nearly as good performance as Ir/B, with an only slightly
lower value.
The high reflectivity required for a multilayer reflecting interface may be seriously hampered
by the roughness of the reflecting surface. As interface roughness increase, the reflectivity of the
multilayers deteriorates drastically due to increased scattering. The influence of surface roughness
on the reflectivity for a ray with wavelength λ and a grazing incidence angle θi from an ambient
with refractive index n can be defined as Debye-Waller formula:24

R(θi ) = R0 exp[−(

4π
σnsinθi )2 ]
λ

(1)

where R is absolute reflectivity, R0 is theoretical reflectance for an ideal interface and σ is average
interface roughness. This equation shows the reflectivity decreases as the exponential of the square
of the roughness and also the reflection at larger grazing incidence angles is more sensitive to the
roughness effect. This is demonstrated in Figure 3, showing modelings of reflectivities versus
interface roughness for W/Si multilayer at 122 keV and different grazing incidence angle. It is
clear that, in order to maintain a reflectivity of greater than 90% for grazing incidence angles less
5

than 0.03◦ , a roughness of less than 2.5 nm is required. As shown in Table 1, we have met this
requirement in our experimental work.
High-energy radiation (above 100 keV) traveling in a medium of low density ρ1 impinging
on denser material of density ρ2 at small grazing incidence angle totally reflects if the grazing
incidence angle is less than the critical angle:

θc =

q
2
2
− ωp1
ωp2
ω

√
−2

≈ 2.038 × 10

ρ2 − ρ1 [g/cm3 ]
E[keV ]

(2)

where ω = E/~ (~ = 6.58 × 10−16 eV.s) is the angular frequency of incoming radiation and
q
2
ωp = εN0eme 0 is the plasma frequency of material. Here Ne is the number density of electrons, e is
the electric charge, ε0 is the permittivity of free space and m0 is the effective mass of the electron.
The critical angle increases for a larger reflecting layer density and decreases in proportion to
the increasing photon energy. This implies that, at a fixed grazing incidence angle, only gammaray energies below a cut-off value Ec can be totally reflected, and this is the main reason why
single-layer optics can not be used in X-ray/gamma-ray focusing optics. We have shown this in
Figure 4 for W/Si multilayer where the reflectivity suddenly drops at Ec and for increasing grazing
incidence angle the cut-off energy decreases.

3 Gamma-Ray Tracing Code
We developed a ray tracing model for the gamma-ray concentrator, using IMD reflectivities and
absorption/scattering coefficients. We have assumed 1 nm roughness in all the modelings, for
consistency with the previous section. This modeling lets us track photons inside of multilayer and
compare channeling efficiency for different energy bands, incident angles, material combinations

6

and lens geometries. To illustrate the efficiency of the channeling technique, we examined the 20
cm diameter lens constructed of 30 nm/150 nm bilayers of W/Si, with an 8 m focal length. We
divided the lens concept into concentric rings so that the channeling length may be adjusted based
on the required bending angle (that is, the angle normally-incident radiation on the lens must be
deflected to hit the focal point) at each radius. We chose eighteen rings, each 5 mm thick, starting
at an inner radius of 1.5 cm and extending out to 10 cm. The required bending angle varies from
∼0.11◦ for the inner ring to ∼0.72◦ for the outer ring (see Figure 5).
Figure 6 displays tracking of outgoing 122 keV beams from a series of multilayers located at
these rings and the focused spot histogram at the focal plane. The size of the focal spot diameter,
concentrated at 8 m focal length for the parallel beams, is <1 cm.
By this modeling we can also consider the sensitivity of focal spot shape to the incident angle
on the concentrator of incoming gamma rays which leads to the instrument Field Of View (FOV).
Figure 7 indicates the radial profile beam illuminated by 122 keV gamma-ray beams with 0, 1.2,
2.4 and 3.6 arcmin incident angle. The shape of the profile beam spreads, as the incident angle
increase resulting in a 3.6 arcmin FOV for 1 cm focal spot. Figure 8 also illustrates the FOV and
shows the channeling probability as a function of photon incidence angle at 122 keV for a 0.11◦
bending angle. For incidence angles on the concentrator larger than 3.6 arcmin the calculated
probability is less than 5%, and the FWHM of the FOV is ±2.5 arcmin. We note that modern
scientific balloon platforms, such as the Wallops Arc Second Pointer (WASP), are easily capable
of keeping sources within this FOV during pointed observations.
In addition, the simulation code calculates the channeling probability and consider the lens

7

effective area through each ring using the relation of:

P (E) = R1 (E)R2 (E)...Rn (E)×e(−µE ρSi d1 ) e(−µE ρSi d2 ) ...e(−µE ρSi dn ) ×OpenF raction×60% (3)

where Rn and the exponential terms are the reflectance and absorption respectively, µE is the
attenuation coefficient, ρSi is the mass density of channeling layer, n represents the number of
reflections and the dn is the distance between two sequential reflection points. The number of
reflections varies from 17 to 38 for a parallel beam and it depends on the length and radius of each
ring. The open fraction term is equivalent of the ratio of spacer layer thickness to the period of
bilayers which is equal to 150/180. We also assume that 40% of the geometric area of the lens will
be taken up by mounting and alignment hardware. The resulting effective area for each ring, and
the total for the complete lens which was calculated by summing the contributions from each ring,
are reported in Figure 9.

4 Design and Simulation of Focal Plane Detector
The primary simulation to estimate the performance of potential focal plane detectors for the soft
gamma-ray concentrator was made using the ”MEGAlib” software tools25 and it contains the instrument geometry, gamma-ray propagation through the detector setup, and dominant background
components. This simulation allows us to determine the detector performance and optimize the
design of a full-scale telescope configuration with respect to the desired scientific requirements.

4.1 Geometry Design
We were able to construct a completely flexible and scalable geometry with two different detectors
that can be part of the focal plane assembly: The first is a single multi-pixel CZT based detector
8

which has high detection efficiency and good spatial resolution, and the other is a Compton camera
made of a Silicon tracker+CZT absorber which is capable of detecting the polarized radiations. We
were looking to compare a simple example vs. a more complex one, while both geometries should
have a higher performance than a scintillation detector.
The first geometry is a single 11 by 11 pixel CZT crystal of 20×20×15 mm3 size with a
pixel pitch of 1.72 mm, such as been developed by Orion Radiation Measurement Group.26 The
CZT detector has a Gaussian energy resolution of 1.25% FWHM at 662 keV with 10 keV trigger
threshold and 1 keV noise threshold . An active BGO shield surrounding the central CZT is
assumed as the instrument shielding to greatly reduce the background. The shield is 5 cm thick
at the bottom and 2 cm thick on the sides. An energy resolution of 20% FWHM at 100 keV and
a trigger threshold of 70 keV is used for the BGO. The detector assembly is placed inside of an
aluminum vessel with a window covering by Mylar plastic sheet of 0.5 mm thickness.
The second geometry is a polarimeter that includs a Silicon tracker in which the first Compton
interaction takes place and the CZT absorber surrounding the tracker. This geometry is a more
compact version of SGD on the ASTRO-H mission.10 The Silicon tracker consists of 32 layers
of double-sided Silicon pixel (10 by 10 pixel) detectors with a size of 20×20×0.6 mm3 and has
energy resolution, trigger and noise thresholds similar to the CZT detector. The absorber detector
is one CZT detector at the bottom and four at the sides. This model includes a PEEK frame for the
Silicon tracker as a passive material to support the wafers structure and a larger BGO than previous
geometry with same thickness. Both proposed instruments with shielding and support structure are
represented in Figure 10 .

9

4.2 Source and Background Modeling
At soft gamma-ray energies, the Crab is considered a strong source due to its large and nearly constant luminosity. Therefore, we chose a Crab-like source observed by INTEGRAL/SPI,27 which
E
has a power low spectrum in the form of F (E) = K( 1keV
)−α with a spectral index α=2.17±0.01

and a normalization K=14.44±0.44 ph/s/cm2 /keV. We modified the input spectrum for the effects
of atmospheric absorption using the Mass Attenuation Coefficients from NIST28 for a balloon payload at an atmospheric depth of 3.5 g/cm2 and 30 deg zenith angle. Additionally, the effects of
concentrator were taken into account using the calculated lens effective area (see Figure 9). For
the beam type, we used a 2D beam profile given by the concentrated radial beam on focal plane
(see Figure 7). The initial position was randomly chosen within the extent of this profile and the
direction was set to the -z direction, towards the instrument aperture. For our purposes, an effective
observation time of 6 hr was assumed for a balloon flight. The source flux was integrated over 10
keV to 430 keV and an intensity of ∼ 6.15 ph/s was estimated. Figure 11 displays the incidence
energy histogram for a 6 hr observation time of a balloon flight.
To predict the sensitivity of the detector, we also modeled the dominant background components during a balloon flight and their effects on instrument performance. We followed the model
developed by Gehrels29 for shield leakage from the gamma-ray background. The zenith angle
distribution of the total gamma-ray flux in the atmosphere was applied to 20 keV-10 MeV energy range. We also added the neutron flux induced in the earth’s atmosphere by galactic protons
and alpha particles during solar minimum for a geomagnetic latitude of 42◦ N.30 Additionally, the
background simulation included cosmic electrons, positrons, and protons as well as secondary particles produced in the atmosphere through cosmic ray induced air showers which were modeled by

10

Mizuno et al.31 However, due to the complex detector geometries, the good background suppression, and very low flux, collecting enough statistics for a performance estimate for charged particle
backgrounds required several days to run. In the end, the detected counts were only gamma-ray
and neutron counts.

5 Results Analysis
5.1 Source to Background Ratio
The voxelization of CZT and Silicon allowed us to select events within the radial profile of the
concentrator beam. An IDL code was written to select events that have at least one hit within the
radius of input beam (5 mm). As it is shown in Figure 12 (a) in the CZT detector for gamma-ray
background, the valid background counts fall within the expected radial beam which will cause
improvement in signal to noise ratio and sensitivity calculations. The detected backgrounds and
Crab-like source as well as the statistical uncertainties coming from the number of simulated events
are represented in Figure 12 (b) which implies high signal to noise ratio for this detector geometry.

5.2 Effective Area
The instrument efficiency is one of the key element of the detector response which can be described
in terms of the telescope effective area. The complete telescope effective area for both geometries
as a function of energy is given in Figure 13. The influence of materials absorption edge on
instrument efficiency around 70 keV is evident. The effective area of the polarimeter is slightly
less than single CZT for energies above 60 keV , since the Compton scatter events need to deposit
enough energy for a trigger in both tracker and absorber detectors, and also there are some gaps in
CZT, so the scatter photons can escape. Also plotted is the effective area of the SGD instrument

11

on ASTROH/Hitomi,10 which peaks at ∼25 cm2 around 110 keV; the strawman concentrator has
approximately double the effective area at this energy.

5.3 Continuum Sensitivity
Another important parameter to explain the ability of any gamma-ray telescope is its sensitivity
which can be described as a quantitative description of the minimum flux that can be detected
within a certain significance. The detection continuum sensitivity depends upon the effective area
of the instrument (Aef f ), the observation time (Tobs ), and the background conditions by:32
√
√
z NS + NB
z 2 + z z 2 + 4NB
Fmin =
=
Aef f Tobs
2Aef f Tobs

(4)

where z is the number of standard deviations, NB is a detected background counts, and NS the
number of detectable source counts. The 3σ sensitivity estimate of CZT geometry for different
observation time is shown in Figure 14 (a). As a reference, the flux of a Crab-like source scaled
by different factors is reported by the orange dashed line. The concentrator+detector system can
achieve a sensitivity between two and three orders of magnitude better than 100 mCrab for energies
below 300 keV for 6 hr observation time which is approximately the maximum time from a balloon
flight in a day for any one source. For longer observation times, it is significantly improved to better
than 1 mCrab below 200 keV.
In addition, we compared the gamma-ray flux from the radioactive decay of the r-process nuclei
in NSM ejecta with the sensitivity of Astro-H (prelaunch) mission and gamma-ray concentrator in
the 300 keV-1 MeV range. Figure 14 (b) shows the gamma-ray fluxes for an observer at a distance
of 3 Mpc on time-scales from a day to several months. Here, the four different ejecta models are

12

illustrated.6 For 300 keV≤ Eγ ≤1 MeV, the gamma-ray flux peaks around 1-10 days. Because
more energy is released in gamma-ray at higher energies and they escape from the ejecta at earlier
times than at lower energies, so the detections may be easier at the higher energy bands. Hence we
performed an extrapolation on the effective area (see Figure 9) similar to work done by Ferreira et
al.33 and then calculated the 3σ sensitivity for energies up to 1 MeV assuming 100 ks observation.
The resultant broadband sensitivity show that concentrator is capable of gamma rays detection of
neutron star mergers even better than SGD at 300 keV-1 MeV for an event at a distance of 3 Mpc
with an ejecta mass of 0.1 MJ .
5.4 Polarization Sensitivity
As part of our simulations, we estimated the minimum detectable polarization (MDP) that could
be achieved by the polarimeter geometry, placed at the focus of the soft gamma-ray lens, for
observations of the Crab and also Cygnus X-1 from a balloon payload. The MDP represents the
minimum level of polarization that can be detected from a source and at a confidence level of 99%
can be expressed as:34
4.29
M DP =
µ100 NS

r

NS + NB
Tobs

(5)

where µ100 is the modulation of the azimuthal scattering angle distribution of a 100% linearly polarized signals. Figure 15 (a) reports the calculated MDP of the Crab (total emission) in the presence of background for each energy band-pass, compared with results from other phase-integrated
polarimetry studies.35–38 The polarization sensitivity falls off at high energies due to lower modulation factor resulting from more forward scattering at higher energies. This simulation shows that
it is potentially possible to measure degrees of polarization lower than 10% for a 6 hr observation
times in the energy range between 20 keV and 230 keV, and polarization degrees lower than 40%
13

in the energy range between 230 keV and 430 keV, and a longer observation time would improve
these values.
We also used INTEGRAL/SPI observations to compare the simulated MDP with the polarized
emission in the gamma-ray energy spectrum of Cygnus X-1 (Figure 15 (b)). Jourdain et al.3 have
reported polarization fraction of Cygnus X-1 in three energy bands. They have shown that the
source emission is strongly polarized above 200 keV, with the fraction of polarization increasing
with energy up to 850 keV. We also added the recent report of the low polarization fraction, ∼
8.6% (upper limit at a 90% confidence level), on the linear polarization of hard X-ray emission
(19-181 keV) from Cygnus X-1.39 Once again, this shows a single-day balloon observation of the
soft gamma-ray concentrator could confirm reported result on Cygnus X-1 polarimetry, even in the
lower energy band where the emission is weakly polarized.

6 Summary
In this paper, we have reported the simulation result for a soft gamma-ray concentrator instrument which utilizes thin-film multilayer structures to form optics capable of concentrating gamma
rays with energies greater than 100 keV. The whole process of concentrator+detector simulation
is illustrated in Figure 16. The first step was the calculation of reflectance functions within the
multilayer as a function of the material combination, photon energy, incidence angle or any of the
multilayer parameters, by IMD software. Coating materials and their combinations were chosen
to achieve maximum reflectivity with a large difference in the atomic number/mass density. By
using calculated reflectivities, we built a custom ray-tracing IDL code, which can model the lens
effective area and the focused beam profile. We utilized these results to modify the input spectrum
and identify source properties for detector performance simulation using MEGAlib tools. This
14

process contained several steps including creation of a realistic geometry of a simple CZT detector
with proper energy resolution and thresholds, utilizing the Crab-like source in order to perform
photon propagation, adding all expected background components for a balloon-borne gamma-ray
instrument and building a mass model for a polarimeter containing a reasonable amount of passive material to determine the polarization sensitivity. The obtained simulation results for both
spectroscopy and polarimetry performances compared to current telescopes show the focal plane
detector of the soft gamma-ray concentrator is potentially well suited to the task of performing
very sensitive measurements. Even a balloon-borne pathfinder mission would be capable of unprecedented observations and exciting new science. The developed modeling tools can motivate
continued future work on multilayer depositions and also have the capability to be used for different lens/detector configuration to find the optimal concentrator design with high channeling
probability.

Acknowledgments
This work was supported by NASA grants NNX14AH57G and NNX17AC85G.

References
1 J. Knödlseder, “The Future of Gamma-Ray Astronomy,” Comptes Rendus Physique 17(6),
663–678 (2016).
2 E. Jourdain and J. P. Roques, “The High Energy Emission of The Crab Nebula from 20 keV
to 6 MeV with INTEGRAL,” The Astrophysical Journal 704, 17–24 (2009).
3 E. Jourdain, J. P. Roques, and J. Malzac, “The Emission of Cygnus X-1: Observations with
INTEGRAL SPI from 20 keV to 2 MeV,” The Astrophysical Journal 744, 64 (2012).

15

4 A. J. Dean, D. J. Clark, J. B. Stephen, et al., “Polarized Gamma-Ray Emission from The
Crab,” Science 321(5893), 1183–1185 (2008).
5 P. Laurent, J. Rodriguez, J. Wilms, et al., “Polarized Gamma-Ray Emission from The Galactic Black Hole Cygnus X-1,” Science 332, 438–439 (2011).
6 K. Hotokezaka, S. Wanajo, M. Tanaka, et al., “Radioactive Decay Products in Neutron Star
Merger Ejecta: Heating Efficiency and Gamma-Ray Emission,” Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society 459(1), 35–43 (2016).
7 A. Goldwurm, P. Goldoni, A. Gros, et al., “Gamma-Ray Imaging with The Coded Mask
IBIS Telescope,” Exploring the Gamma-Ray Universe, Proceedings of the Fourth INTEGRAL
Workshop 459, 497–500 (2001).
8 S. D. Barthelmy, L. M. Barbier, J. R. Cummings, et al., “The Burst Alert Telescope (BAT) on
The SWIFT Midex Mission,” Space Science Reviews 120(3), 143–164 (2005).
9 R. K. Manchanda, “ASTROSAT: Status and Science,” Proceedings of the 29th Meeting of the
Astronomical Society of India 3, 53–63 (2011).
10 S. Watanabe, H. Tajima, Y. F. ukazawa, et al., “The Si/CdTe Semiconductor Compton Camera
of The ASTRO-H Soft Gamma-ray Detector (SGD),” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in
Physics Research, Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 765, 192–201 (2014).
11 F. A. Harrison, W. W. Craig, F. E. Christensen, et al., “The Nuclear Spectroscopic Telescope
Array (NuSTAR) High-energy X-Ray Mission,” The Astrophysical Journal 770(2), 1263–
1267 (2013).

16

12 N. M. Barrière, J. A. Tomsick, S. E. Boggs, et al., “Developing a Method for Soft GammaRay Laue Lens Assembly and Calibration,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics
Research Section A 741, 47–56 (2014).
13 N. F. Brejnholt, M. Descalle, R. Soufli, et al., “Next Generation Hard X-Ray/Soft GammaRay Optic Design and Implementation,” Proc. SPIE 9144, 914419 (2014).
14 D. M. Tournear, M. A. Hoffbauer, E. A. Akhadov, et al., “Gamma-Ray Waveguides,” Applied
Physics Letters 92(15), 153502–1 (2008).
15 D. Tournear, R. Epstein, and R. M. Kippen, “Gamma-Ray Channeling in Layered Structures,”
IEEE Symposium Conference Record Nuclear Science 2004 7, 4282–4285 (2004).
16 P. F. Bloser, P. H. Aliotta, O. Echt, et al., “A Soft Gamma-Ray Concentrator Using Thin-Film
Multilayer Structures,” Proc. SPIE 9603, 96031E–1 (2015).
17 P. F. Bloser, F. Shirazi, O. Echt, et al., “A Concept for A Soft Gamma-Ray Concentrator
Using Thin-Film Multilayer Structures,” Proc. SPIE 9905, 99056L–11 (2016).
18 F. A. Harrison, S. E. Boggs, A. E. Bolotnikov, et al., “Development of The High-Energy
Focusing Telescope (HEFT) Balloon Experiment,” Proc. SPIE 4012, 693 (2000).
19 Y. Ogasaka, J. Tueller, K. Yamashita, et al., “First Light of A Hard-X-Ray Imaging Experiment: The InFOCuS Balloon Flight,” Proc. SPIE 5900, 59000R–1 (2005).
20 F. Shirazi, P. F. Bloser, J. E. Krzanowski, et al., “Simulation and Optimization of A
Soft Gamma-Ray Concentrator Using Thin Film Multilayer Structures,” Proc. SPIE 10399,
10399–1A (2017).
21 F. Shirazi, P. F. Bloser, J. E. Krzanowski, et al., “Modeling and Development of Soft GammaRay Channeling,” Proc. SPIE 10699, 106995V–1 (2018).

17

22 D. L. Windt, “IMD-Software for Modeling The Optical Properties of Multilayer Films,” Computers in Physics 12(4), 360–370 (1998).
23 C. T. Chantler, K. Olsen, R. A. Dragoset, et al., “X-Ray Form Factor, Attenuation and Scattering Tables (Version 2.1),” National Institute of Standards and Technology (2005).
24 E. Spiller, “Characterization of Multilayer Coatings by X-Ray Reflection,” Revue de Physique
Appliquee 23(10), 1687–1700 (1988).
25 A. Zoglauer, R. Andritschke, and F. Schopper, “MEGAlib-The Medium Energy Gamma-ray
Astronomy Library,” New Astronomy Reviews 50(7), 629–632 (2006).
26 J. C. Kim, S. E. Anderson, W. Kaye, et al., “Charge Sharing in Common-Grid Pixelated
CdZnTe Detectors,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 654(1), 233–243 (2011).
27 P. Sizun, C. R. Shrader, D. Attie, et al., “The INTEGRAL/SPI Response and The Crab Observations,” European Space Agency, Special Publication (2004).
28 J. H. Hubbell and S. M. Seltzer, “X-Ray Mass Attenuation Coefficients,” National Institute
of Standards and Technology (2004).
29 N. Gehrels, “Instrumental Background in Balloon-Borne Gamma-Ray Spectrometers and
Techniques for Its Reduction,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, Detectors and Associated Equipment 239(2), 324–349
(1985).
30 T. W. Armstrong, K. C. Chandler, and J. Barish, “Calculations of Neutron Flux spectra Induced in The Earth’s Atmosphere by Galactic Cosmic Rays,” Journal of Geophysical Research 78(16), 2715–2726 (1973).

18

31 T. Mizuno, T. Kamae, G. Godfrey, et al., “Cosmic-Ray Background Flux Model Based on
A Gamma-Ray Large Area Space Telescope Balloon Flight Engineering Model,” The Astrophysical Journal 614(2), 1113–1123 (2004).
32 A. Jacobson, R. Bishop, G. Culp, et al., “A Balloon-Borne Ge(Li) Spectrometer for GammaRay Astronomy,” Nuclear Instruments and Methods 127(1), 115–124 (1975).
33 D. D. M. Ferreira, F. E. Christensen, M. J. Pivovaroff, et al., “Hard X-ray/Soft Gamma-Ray
Telescope Designs for Future Astrophysics Missions,” Proc. SPIE 8861, 886116–1 (2013).
34 M. C. Weisskopf, R. F. Elsner, and S. L. O’Dell, “On Understanding The Figures of Merit
for Detection and Measurement of X-Ray Polarization,” Proc. SPIE Int. Soc. Opt. Eng. 7732,
77320E–1 (2010).
35 M. Chauvin, H. G. Floren, M. Friis, et al., “Shedding New Light on The Crab with Polarized
X-Rays,” Scientific Reports 7(7816), 1–6 (2017).
36 M. Chauvin, J. P. Roques, D. J. Clark, et al., “Polarimetry in The Hard X-Ray Domain with
INTEGRAL/SPI,” The Astrophysical Journal 769(2), 1–8 (2013).
37 M. Forot, P. Laurent, I. A. Grenier, et al., “Polarization of The Crab Pulsar and Nebula as
Observed by The INTEGRAL/IBIS Telescope,” The Astrophysical Journal Letters 688(1),
L29–L32 (2008).
38 S. V. Vadawale, T. Chattopadhyay, N. P. S. Mithun, et al., “Phase-Resolved X-Ray Polarimetry of The Crab Pulsar with The AstroSat CZT Imager,” Nature Astronomy 2, 50–55 (2018).
39 M. Chauvin, H. G. Floren, M. Friis, et al., “Accretion Geometry of The Black-Hole Binary
Cygnus X-1 from X-Ray Polarimetry,” Nature Astronomy 2, 652?655 (2018).

19

40 T. Takahashi, K. Mitsuda, R. Kelley, et al., “The ASTRO-H X-ray observatory,” Proceedings
of SPIE-The International Society for Optical Engineering 8443, 84431Z–1 (2012).

Biographies of the Authors
Farzane Shirazi received her Ph.D. degree in physics from University of New Hampshire in
2018. She was a member of the team that studied the development of the soft gamma-ray concentrator using thin-film multilayer structures and worked on both material science and astrophysics
parts of the project. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow in the high energy astrophysics group at
Clemson University.
Peter Bloser is a member of the technical staff in the Space Science and Applications Group at
Los Alamos National Laboratory. He has over 20 years of experience in experimental high-energy
astrophysics, solar physics, and Special Nuclear Materials detection. He previously was on the
Research Faculty in the Space Science Center at the University of New Hampshire, where he was
the PI of the Advanced Scintillator Compton Telescope (ASCOT) project.
Jason Legere has over fifteen years of experience with gamma-ray and neutron detection instrument development. He most recently managed the construction and testing of the FIND instrument, a hybrid neutron/gamma-ray camera, overseeing the detector design and calibration,
electronics design, readout and data acquisition, and calibration measurements. He played a key
role in the successful science balloon flight of the ASCOT payload from Palestine, TX, and is
currently preparing the GRAPE instrument for balloon flight.
Mark McConnell has more than 35 years experience in developing and using instrumentation
for high energy astrophysics experiments. He served as a co-investigator on the CGRO/COMPTEL
experiment, concentrating on studies of X-ray binaries and solar flares. He has been a guest in-

20

vestigator on the RHESSI, INTEGRAL, and Fermi missions. Currently, he serves as PI for the
GRAPE balloon experiment, designed to measure gamma-ray polarization from GRBs and solar
flares.

Property

Value

Number of bilayers

30

Si average thickness

150 nm

W average thickness

30 nm

Total thickness

∼ 5.4 µm

Si single layer roughness (1 µm scan)

Ra =0.170 nm, Rq =0.227 nm

W single layer roughness (1 µm scan)

Ra =0.163 nm, Rq =0.198 nm

Multilayer surface roughness (1 µm scan) Ra =1.938 nm, Rq =2.156 nm
Table 1: The properties of coated W/Si multilayer (Ra and Rq are arithmetic and root mean square
roughness.)

21

Fig 1: Schematic of ”concentrator” concept, consisting of multilayer structures of low- and highdensity material, gamma-ray internal reflections through layered structure and incident radiations
focusing to a small detector with a focal length of 8-10 m.16

Fig 2: Reflectance as a function of grazing incidence angle for four material combinations for a
122 keV photon.
22

Fig 3: Reflectivity dependence on interface roughness for W/Si multilayer at 122 keV.

Fig 4: Simulated gamma-ray reflectivity curves in W/Si for fixed incidence angles.

23

Fig 5: Conceptual representation of the strawman lens, illustrating the relative length of each ring
(rings would actually consist of 1 cm wide segments).

Fig 6: Ray-tracing routine for 122 keV parallel beams showing the concentrator rings, spacer layer
and reflections as well as the intersection with a detector plane at 8 m focal length.

24

Fig 7: Transformation of the radial profile beam for different incident angles.

25

Fig 8: Modeled channeling probability of W/Si structure for 122 keV photons vs. incidence angle
at 0.11◦ bending angle.

Fig 9: Calculated effective area of the strawman soft gamma-ray concentrator consist of W/Si
multilayer structures. The dashed line shows the extrapolation curve up to 1 MeV which is used to
calculate broadband sensitivity in Figure 14 (b).

26

Fig 10: (a) Assembly of a single multi-pixel CZT detector. (b) Schematic design of polarimeter
mass model with shielding and passive materials.

Fig 11: Incidence energy histogram: Crab spectrum modified by atmospheric and concentrator
effects for a 6 hr observation time.

27

Fig 12: (a) Detected counts of simulated gamma-ray background before (yellow) and after (green)
event selections within the radial beam in the CZT detector. (b) 6 hr detected spectra of simulated
Crab-like source and backgrounds for pixelated CZT geometry.

Fig 13: Computed effective area of the complete telescope as a function of energy for single CZT
detector and polarimeter.

28

Fig 14: (a) Comparison of the simulated continuum sensitivities as a function of energy different
observation times along with Crab spectra corresponding to 100%,10%, 1% and 0.1%. (b) Light
curves of nuclear gamma ray for NSM-solar in the ranges of 300 keV-1 MeV at a distance of
3Mpc. The broadband sensitivity is also given with exposure at 100 ks of Astro-H40 mission and
the concentrator of the Crab flux.

Fig 15: Calculated MDP for a simulated 6 hr observation of the (a) Crab, (b) Cygnus X-1, using the
polarimeter focal plane detector, compared with reported results from various polarimetry studies.

29

Fig 16: An illustration of concentrator+detector simulation flowchart.

30

